# Onyx Music Game Toolkit (version _ONYXVERSION_)

By Michael Tolly <onyxite@gmail.com>

Onyx is a multipurpose build tool for Guitar-Hero/Rock-Band-like music games.
It can import and export a wide variety of formats, move parts around,
change song speed, fill in missing details, and assist with song authoring.

Built on work and research by:

  * Harmonix
  * Inventor211 (3D assets, design, QA)
  * TrojanNemo, emist (C3 CON Tools, Magma v2 mod)
  * No1mann (Magma v1 mod)
  * maxton, PikminGuts92 (LibForge/ForgeTool, milo lipsync help)
  * StackOverflow0x (MiloMod, milo venue help)
  * xorloser (ArkTool/DtbCrypt)
  * deimos (dtb2dta)
  * qwertymodo (Magma MOGG redirect)
  * Bloodline, Inventor211 (GHL MIDI format help)
  * DJ Shepherd (X360)
  * arkem (py360)
  * and many others!

New versions and source at: https://github.com/mtolly/onyxite-customs/releases

Onyx is free software via the GNU General Public License v3;
see LICENSE.txt or https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html

All original non-code assets such as graphics are licensed under
Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike:
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/

## Requirements

Onyx is currently compiled on:

  * Windows 10
  * macOS High Sierra
  * Linux kernel 4.4 (Ubuntu 16.04)

It may work on previous versions (such as Windows 7) but this is not certain.

By default, an embedded copy of Magma v2 is used to generate RB3 or RB2 files.
This requires the Visual C++ runtime, and if on Mac or Linux, Wine.

  * On Mac, you can use the official installer, or you can use Homebrew
    (`brew install wine`).

    However, macOS Catalina (10.15) does not support running Magma in Wine due
    to its lack of support for 32-bit programs. To produce Rock Band files on
    this OS you'll need to turn Magma compilation off.

  * To bypass Magma compilation, go to `Edit > Preferences` in the top menu, and
    change the Magma selection to an option other than "Magma required". Please
    make sure and test any resulting files! If you're on Windows I recommend
    leaving it on "Magma optional", so you can see any error messages; they'll
    be converted to warnings and you'll still get the resulting song file.

The Linux build is produced via an Ubuntu 14.04 Docker container, and should
work on most any modern distribution. Older distributions might require
additional installations:

  * On CentOS 7, `yum install mesa-libGL fontconfig` is required.

## Instructions

  * On Windows, run the installer, then run `onyx.exe`
    (or the installed shortcut).

  * On Mac, move `Onyx.app` to your Applications folder, and then run it.

  * On Linux, make the `.AppImage` executable, place it wherever you like,
    and run it. Your system may also offer to install desktop integration.

## Supported Formats

Onyx can import the following song formats:

  * Rock Band 1/2/3 STFS (CON or LIVE) files

    * Both single-song files and packs are supported.

  * Magma (v1 or v2) RBA files

  * Frets on Fire / Phase Shift / Clone Hero formats

    * Both `notes.mid` and `notes.chart` are supported.
    * Both OGG Vorbis and MP3 audio are supported.
    * `song.ini` can be absent if using `notes.chart`.
    * Audio files must be named according to PS/CH conventions.

  * Magma (v1 or v2) projects (.rbproj)

  * Guitar Hero, Guitar Hero II, or Guitar Hero Encore: Rocks the 80s (PS2)

    * Extract the `.iso` contents, and then import either `GEN` or `MAIN.HDR`.

  * DTXMania (DrumMania / GuitarFreaks) simfiles (.dtx/.gda)

    * XG features (5-fret guitar/bass, extra drum pads) are supported.
    * Drums are translated to Pro Drums as well as Phase Shift Real Drums.
      (Real Drums display in the player but aren't yet included in PS output.)
    * Keysounded audio is rendered to stem files.
    * Currently only each instrument's highest difficulty from a `set.def`
      is imported as Expert, and difficulties below this are autogenerated.
      To import a specific difficulty directly, import its `.dtx` file.

## Single Song Mode

Click "Load a song", and browse to a supported song file.
You can also drag and drop a file onto the button, or onto the app icon on Mac.

  * The *Metadata* tab displays loaded metadata from the source song.
    You can edit data here to have it reflected in any converted output.

  * The *Instruments* tab shows all the gameplay modes Onyx found in the song.
    Modes are sorted first by logical instrument, and then the specific
    controllers that instrument supports.

    Deselecting an instrument mode checkbox will hide it from any output files.

    In addition to difficulty selections, some controller modes have other
    specific options, such as drum freestyle sounds or number of vocal parts.

  * The *Preview* tab lets you view and listen to supported gameplay tracks
    in a full 3D graphical display. Currently 5-fret guitar/bass/keys (including
    tap/open notes) and 4-lane drums (including cymbals) are supported, with
    more to come.

    You can configure MSAA and FXAA antialiasing in `Edit > Preferences`.

    Gem models and textures created by Inventor211. Most textures, models, and
    shaders are customizable, inside the `onyx-resources` folder.

      * Windows: `C:\Program Files\OnyxToolkit\onyx-resources` or similar
      * Mac: View contents of `Onyx.app`, then `Contents/MacOS/onyx-resources`
      * Linux: Extract `.AppImage`, then `usr/bin/onyx-resources`

    The file `3d-config.yml` contains settings you may also want to edit.

  * The *Stars* tab contains a score cutoff calculator for Rock Band 3, with
    more games planned to come. Select any tracks you want to include, and
    all star cutoffs will be computed.

  * The *RB3*, *RB2*, *CH/PS*, and *GH2* tabs convert your song to the given
    game's format. All tabs let you change the song speed (if supported), and
    can also redirect any instrument parts to new "slots". For example, in a
    Rock Band 3 file, the 5-fret tracks for guitar, bass, and keys can be moved
    around, or even applied to more than 1 slot.

    Note that if your song is a Rock Band file with an encrypted MOGG, you can
    only convert it to a Rock Band output format at 100% speed; Clone Hero
    format and/or modifying the speed are not supported.

    See the "Batch Mode" section for more details on each output format.

  * The *Utilities* tab contains functions other than song conversion. See
    their descriptions in the "Other Tools" section below for more info.

## Batch Mode

First, load files into the Songs tab.
You can drag and drop files or folders onto the list, or browse with Add Song.
Folders will be searched for any recognized songs inside.
To remove a song, select its row in the tree, and press the Delete key.
To change the order of songs, select its row and press Ctrl+Up or Ctrl+Down
(Windows/Linux), or Cmd+Up or Cmd+Down (Mac).

At the bottom of the tab are toggles for whether specific instruments should
be imported. These can be helpful if unnecessary instrument parts are causing
compilation errors.

  * Rock Band 3 (360)

    Creates either a Rock Band 3 CON file or a Magma v2 project.

    Here is a sample of the steps performed when importing from FoF/PS/CH:

      * Add appropriate `[music_start]`, `[music_end]`, and `[end]` events
      * Generate an automatic `BEAT` track from MIDI time signatures
      * Add auto-generated (roughly CAT-quality) lower difficulties if missing
      * Import as much metadata as possible from `song.ini`
      * Apply the correct `delay` value from `song.ini` to the audio
      * Delay the song start by a few seconds if notes are present too early
      * Detect double drum roll lanes using the single lane note and fix them
      * Alter the tempo map to fix some instances of too-slow/too-fast tempos
      * Convert 5-lane drums to 4-lane using the standard Phase Shift rules
      * Convert Phase Shift "Real Drums" to RB by removing hihat pedal notes
      * Convert tap notes to HOPO notes
      * Remove some overdrive phrases if they produce invalid unison phrases,
        have no notes under them on any difficulty, or have no notes between
        two adjacent phrases on any difficulty

    If the "automatic tom markers" option is turned on, an FoF song that doesn't
    have any tom markers and that does not have "pro_drums = True" in the
    song.ini will have tom markers added over the whole drum part, under the
    assumption that Pro Drums have not been authored for the chart.

    Open notes from a PS or CH song will be translated to green notes. Sequences
    of notes adjacent to open notes will be moved up one fret if necessary to
    preserve motion.

    The song speed can be modified to produce sped up or slowed down songs.
    This will modify both the audio and MIDI, and add (X% Speed) to the title.
    For CON inputs this only works with unencrypted MOGG files.
    Different speed versions may not pass Magma in all cases, if certain events
    become too close together or too far apart.
    If this happens, you can produce a Magma project and then make the needed
    changes before compiling with Magma.

    A few options are available for moving Guitar/Bass/Keys parts:
    `Copy G to K`, `Swap G and K`, and `Swap B and K`. In all cases, force notes
    will be applied so charts keep their strum/HOPO notes correct when switched
    between Keys and Guitar/Bass. If `Copy G to K` is selected and a guitar stem
    is present, depending on the input format, the guitar audio will either be
    linked to both guitar and keys (for CON or RBA inputs) or moved to the
    backing track (for FoF/PS/CH and .rbproj inputs).

    By default, an input format like Phase Shift that can contain both 1x and
    2x Bass Pedal drums charts will generate two separate songs. If you are
    interested in only 1x or only 2x, select the appropriate Bass Pedal option.
    Songs that are detected as 2x Bass Pedal versions can also produce an
    automatic 1x version, using an algorithm to remove certain kick notes.

    When creating a Magma project, a REAPER project will also be generated
    so any remaining problems can be quickly edited and re-exported to MIDI.
    This avoids a few bugs in REAPER's own MIDI import function.
    It also applies most of the C3 template to the MIDI tracks,
    so you get note names, colored tracks, and RBN preview windows.
    Because this must generate WAV audio files to give to Magma,
    encrypted MOGG files in input rb3cons are unsupported.

    Tip: to process a song with a C3-encrypted MOGG, one option is to use
    the Phase Shift converter in C3 CON Tools which mixes the audio down to a
    single file, and then just supply the Phase Shift song to Onyx.

  * Rock Band 2 (360)

    Creates a CON file for Rock Band 2, using the following conversions:

      * removes RB3 added features like pro instruments, harmonies, bass solos,
        trill/tremolo, new drum animations
      * any 2-instrument unisons are made into 1-instrument OD phrases
      * converts VENUE to RB2 format
      * ensures lower difficulties have all colors used on Expert

    Then it will attempt to validate the song through Magma v1.
    If this succeeds, you're good to go.
    If it fails, it will still continue and simply copy the MIDI as-is.
    The result will still probably work; you just won't get lipsync animations.

    You can choose to drop the Keys part, or move it to Guitar or Bass.
    In the latter two cases, the RB3 "keytar" algorithm is more-or-less applied,
    so fast chords become HOPOs, and overlapping sustains are shortened.

  * Clone Hero/Phase Shift

    Generates a song folder (or zip file containing one) in Phase Shift format.
    These should play correctly in the latest free version of Phase Shift,
    the Steam version of Phase Shift, and the latest version of Clone Hero.
    Songs may also work in Frets on Fire X, but this is not guaranteed.

    Due to how the conversion is implemented, some non-RB features such as Dance
    mode, Real Drums, and Real Keys will not survive a PS-to-PS conversion.
    However other 5-fret charts such as `PART RHYTHM`, as well as Clone Hero
    6-fret tracks, should remain.

  * Guitar Hero II

    Includes a variety of formats for Guitar Hero II on PS2 and Xbox 360:

      * Add a new bonus song to a PS2 GH2 or GH80s ARK file. Note that Xbox 360
        is not yet supported but is planned at a later date.

      * Create a folder of files ready to add manually to an ARK. Currently this
        only supports the PS2 song format but an Xbox 360 version will also be
        added in the future.

      * Create a DLC LIVE file for GH2 for Xbox 360. This requires an RGH or
        JTAG console to load.

        NOTE: GH2 is only able to load 16 individual DLC package files. Trying
        to load more than 16 will not only fail to load the ones past 16, but
        the game will corrupt your save data when saving. To avoid this, please
        use the pack creator in "Other tools" to combine songs before playing.

    PS2 songs have been tested with standard GH2, as well as Guitar Hero II
    Deluxe.

    For PS2 output, practice mode audio generation can be enabled or disabled.
    Disabling it saves some space, and a significant amount of conversion time.
    If disabled, practice mode will still work, just with no audio. If enabled,
    songs with no instrument stems will use the full track as their practice
    audio.

    In batch mode, lead and coop parts are assigned automatically based on
    what parts are present.

      * Lead will be assigned to the first of [guitar, rhythm, keys, bass]
      * Coop will be assigned to the first of [rhythm, bass, keys]
        which is not already used for Lead

    To customize part assignment, use the "Load a song" mode.

  * Rock Band 3 (Wii)

    Converts a collection of songs to a single RB3 pack in the format used by
    the Dolphin Wii emulator. This is primarily intended for people using
    Dolphin to record videos of songs.

    Only STFS (CON/LIVE) files should be selected. Convert any other formats to
    RB3 CON first if needed.

    Options are available for certain MIDI transformations useful for videos:

      * Remove activation drum fills
      * Remove the Mustang version of a Pro Guitar/Bass track, ensuring the
        Squier version (supporting more than 17 frets) will always be played
      * Unmute any muted Pro Guitar/Bass notes over fret 22. This allows you
        to include such notes while compiling with Magma, and then unmute
        them for recording the video

  * Preview

    Generates a JavaScript (Canvas) chart preview app for web browsers,
    which plays back the audio and displays all tracks in 2D "Beatmania" style.

    Supports all Rock Band 3 instrument tracks, including Pro Guitar/Bass/Keys,
    as well as Clone Hero's 6-fret (GHL) mode, 5-lane Drums, and PS Real Drums.

    A player folder will appear next to each song; open `index.html` to run.
    It can be run locally via `file://`, or hosted on a web server.

    Colors used for drawing the display can be tweaked by editing the file
    `customize.js`. In the future this will be improved to allow overriding
    all pixel sizes as well, so images will be further customizable.

## Other Tools

  * Fill in automatic lower difficulties (MIDI function)

    Generates CAT-like automatic reductions for empty difficulties in a MIDI.
    Quality is not guaranteed, but they should pass Magma.

    To use, ensure that there are no notes or events authored
    for a difficulty you want to be filled in.
    (For Pro Keys, remove the `PART REAL_KEYS_?` track entirely.)

    If a drum track with no animations is present, drum animations will also
    be generated. These are of somewhat higher quality than the ones Magma can
    generate, as they will always handle tom markers correctly, and have more
    of a preference for double strokes rather than crossing hands.

  * Find hanging Pro Keys notes (MIDI function)

    Looks for cases in a Pro Keys track where a range shift occurs less than
    1 second before a note that is not visible in the previous range.

  * Make Reaper project with RB template (MIDI function)

    Imports a MIDI file into a REAPER project. It avoids a few bugs in REAPER's
    own MIDI import function, and applies track names and note colors similar to
    the RBN or C3 project templates.

  * MOGG/VGS creator

    Generates an unencrypted MOGG or VGS file from a set of input audio files.
    Created MOGG files should work on Rock Band games, Guitar Hero II for Xbox
    360, and newer games such as Audica, with a proper seek header. Created VGS
    files should work on the PS2 games GH1, GH2, and GH80s; I have not tested
    with PS2 Rock Band games.

    The channels of all the input files, which can be WAV, OGG, MP3, or FLAC,
    will be merged into one multichannel file. As with the batch load screen,
    you can select a song row, and press Delete to remove it, Ctrl+Up to move it
    up in the list, or Ctrl+Down to move it down.

    As a special case, if you provide a single OGG file and convert to MOGG, it
    will not be reencoded, but will go straight into the MOGG.

  * Pack creator

    Combines Xbox 360 CON/LIVE files into packages containing multiple songs.
    Works with both Rock Band, and Guitar Hero II.

    Packs are useful for RB songs because they can load faster on game launch.
    For GH2, they are required due to a hard limit of 16 total package files.

    To use, drag in the existing files to be combined, give the package a name
    to identify it, and click the appropriate button below: CON packs for
    RB2 or RB3 (TU4 or RB3 Enhanced), LIVE packs for GH2.

    All files from the inputs are combined into one tree for the package.
    If more than one input contains the same file:

      * If the file ends in `.dta`, the contents are combined into one file.
      * Otherwise, an error is raised.

    The game information (name, title ID, thumbnail) are taken from the first
    input package in the list.

  * Lipsync file generation

    Use simple phonetic analysis to convert from a vocals chart to a lipsync
    file. Uses a dictionary to look up English lyrics, or spelling-based rules
    for German or Spanish lyrics. English supports these phonetic features at
    the moment:

      * RB3: simple vowels, vowel diphthongs, consonants
      * TBRB: simple vowels, vowel diphthongs
      * GH2: simple vowels

    Supports generating `.voc` files (used in GH2), as well as `.milo_*` files
    for later RB games.

    There is also a MIDI track format for encoding lipsync information, which
    lets you make manual edits before converting the rest of the way to the
    animation files. The workflow is as follows:

      1. Turn vocal tracks into LIPSYNC* tracks for either RB3 or TBRB.

      2. Edit the text events to modify the animations. The meaning of text
        events is as follows:

        * `[viseme_name N]` moves linearly from weight N to this viseme's next
          event

        * `[viseme_name N hold]` continues weight N until this viseme's next
          event

        * `[viseme_name N ease]` moves from weight N to this viseme's next
          event, using an "easeInExpo" transition function

      3. For TBRB, rename the tracks from LIPSYNC1, LIPSYNC2, etc. to one of
        LIPSYNC_JOHN, LIPSYNC_PAUL, LIPSYNC_GEORGE, or LIPSYNC_RINGO.

      4. Make or update a .milo_* file, and it will use the LIPSYNC tracks
        as input.

  * Lipsync dry vocals audio creation for Magma

    Two options for generating audio files to give to Magma's vocal animation
    generator.

      * Sine wave dryvox: the pitches from the vocal track become simple pitch
        tones. This is used by Onyx for Magma v1 (RB2) which is picky about
        matching the charted vocal pitches to the dry vocal file, and can error
        if it thinks they do not match.

        Currently slides are not yet supported.

      * Clipped dryvox: an input audio file, either a mixed song file or an
        isolated vocal file, is clipped so audio is only present during the
        vocal notes. This is used by Onyx when exporting Magma v2 projects.

  * `.milo` unpack and repack

    Allows editing files inside the `.milo` archive format seen in more recent
    RB song files, which can contain lipsync, venue information (RB3 onward),
    and tweaks to character animation + vocal assignment.

    Only the `ObjectDir` format (used in song files) is supported; other milos
    found on game discs will likely not work.

  * Black `VENUE` patcher

    Modifies existing CON files so the `VENUE` track is replaced with a static
    black background. Should work on both RB3 and RB2 format songs.

  * RB3 song cache ID application

    When a Rock Band custom song contains a symbol rather than a number in the
    `song_id` field, a random number is generated by the game, and saved in the
    song cache file. This ID is used for associating songs with scores. If you
    regenerate the song cache file, new IDs will be assigned, and the scores
    will be disconnected.

    This tool allows you to hardcode the random IDs back into the song files,
    replacing the symbol IDs that they originally had. Then, even if the song
    cache is regenerated from scratch, all scores will still be associated with
    their songs.
